just for once we'd love for AMD to focus
on selling its product based on its
actually strong performance rather than
twisting words in marketing and the we
told you so for years we've emailed you
telling you that this would happen and
Andy has really backed itself into a
corner of the last few weeks it spent
years flinging its own feces at Intel
and NVIDIA instead of talking about how
good its products are instead of talking
about AMD it's taking stabs at Intel
every single chance it gets in some sort
of plate to the cheap seats and frankly
Andy has gotten what it deserved and its
fans have gotten a bit of a wake-up call
to all those times that people have
knocked and these Dan encephalic
marketing department over the years it's
not been for no reason it's because
people knew this would happen so today
we're going to be recapping Andy's
latest controversy from two angles one
of them will be a bit of semi venting at
the beginning about and these marketing
and why it's explicitly been bad in a
lot of ways and why Andy gets itself
into this trouble when really it doesn't
need to the second half we're going to
talk about the actual defense Andy has
had about the ROM size we're going to
provide some facts from motherboard
makers the goal is to try and achieve
some balance between Andy really
actually did screw up and it needs to
learn and also the fans have gone a
little bit overboard because people are
now treating this issue of B 450
motherboard support going forward as a
bigger deal than actual world issues and
when that's happening maybe it's a
little bit unhealthy so we're trying to
reach a bit of a balance in other words
what I'm saying is first I'll attack
then I'll protect and and the for its
marketing it's a pretty good smack so
let's get started before that this video
is brought to you by us and the gamers
access large mod Matt we just received a
massive restock so if you've been
waiting for one of our critically
acclaimed anti-static PC building
services now is a great time to order
the mod mats protect your table during
builds and include pin out diagrams that
we use nearly daily for power testing
they also have grids with a silhouette
to aid in tracking screws for your own
component tear downs and use an
anti-static material made by our factory
that
cleaner in parts to help protect
sensitive electronics grab your GN mod
mat on store documents Lexus dotnet
today and it'll ship immediately if
you're out of the loop here's a quick
recap
Andy announced that only the 500 series
chipsets would support Xen 3 going
forward which means buyers of B 450 are
left stranded without an upgrade path as
for why people are angry it mostly boils
down to two things one and these
marketing insinuated that its long-term
socket support is equivalent to
long-term chipset support leading buyers
of B 450 to feel stranded and misled by
marketing to be 550 has been continually
delayed a month after month with board
makers getting told a new date each
month
this meant that B 550 missed the launch
of Zen 2 and the rise in 3000 CPUs and
because X 570 is so unaffordable priced
for so many people the would-be buyers
of B 550 ended up reaching the limit of
their patience and purchasing B 450
instead no one is going to reasonably
buy an expensive X 570 board with the
lower end rise in 3000 series CPUs Andy
just launched the Rison 330 130 300 X
and coupling that with X 570 doesn't
make sense but at the same time these
are CPUs that you would probably want to
upgrade in socket in the future as for
how common upgrades in socket are we
don't have firm numbers on that that's
the TLDR if you want actual numbers and
specifications of what the chipsets do
we have a video on it
B 550 makes a lot of sense for a lot of
people but it's not out yet it didn't
launch with Rison 3000 with our 5s that
made sense of it it didn't launch with
the rise in 3030 130 300 acts that made
sense with it so Andy did definitely
screw up there especially since we now
know that the older boards won't support
it going forward all right so we need to
present to Andy's defense we'll do that
in the back half of this video and
elaborate on it we spoke with
motherboard manufacturers to validate
some of them these claims there is
validity to it a lot of people are
knocking the ROM size claim it's real
ROM size is a serious limitation from
other board makers you see things like
click BIOS getting dropped because all
the flashy graphics
can't be there while also supporting all
the CPUs so we'll talk about that in a
little bit but first the marketing stuff
Andy has a history of obtuse marketing
it plays to the cheap seats that's what
it does best or at least what it thinks
it does best
Andy has spent years stoking the fires
and building a rabid fan base and that
rabid fan base attacks everyone at first
sight of criticism of Andy we're not
talking about the people who like AMD
products we're talking about actual
rabid fans where all they do is post
about Andy and that's a small group but
it's the one that Andy has really
latched itself onto every company has
this group of people it's not special to
Andy what's important here is that Andy
has sort of integrated itself with these
people look at Red Team Plus for example
and now you have a situation where am
these most supportive fans also feel the
most burned by AMD when it turns back on
its marketing so it's coming back to
bite the company to give you some
behind-the-scenes history when AMD
invites us and all the other oppressed
to its media events will fly maybe
across the country sometimes across the
world to go to these and a lot of the
time rather than just telling us about
AMD and all of its advancements it ends
up telling us about Intel and NVIDIA and
it does through so through jokes like I
recently infantile jokes about DLS being
blurry while simultaneously really seen
the worst GPU drivers known to man and a
$700 paperweight GPU that was superseded
and forgotten four months later and the
also would prefer to make fun of Intel's
migrational motherboard path saying
quote it seems hostile and abusive to
arbitrarily prevent users from keeping
the same motherboard while then going on
to do the exact same thing and these
marketing people spend so much time on
Reddit at this point that they've become
part of it they have become reddit and
although it's not a bad thing to use
reddit if you like it it is a bad thing
for a company to become that deeply
integrated into a subset of its
community andy has a market cap of over
sixty billion dollars it has 12,000
employees it's not a small company and
the only audience that caters to is
certainly not just people who build pcs
as enthusiasts it's got a much wider
market than that and it needs to look
past that so this is something where
Andy has built its marketing now around
the appeasement of infantile [__]
flinging on
reddit and it's targeting an extremely
vocal minority the marketing has arced
like a boomerang and it's come back to
hit AMD in the face that's the history
of what's going on
the truth is Intel has reasons for doing
what it does beyond just money and while
money is a driving factor there are
actual technical limitations or
partnership relations reasons that Intel
as the largest silicon company period in
this this space there's big ones outside
of that but as the largest one in this
space there are reasons that Andy is now
learning until segments its chipsets so
here's what AMD said that really got it
in trouble in the most technical sense
and the officially stated the following
quote we at AMD made a commitment to
maintain and support socket am 4 through
2020 later Andy began changing this
phrasing and it add up saying until 2020
so it became nebulous which one it
really meant but these two have starkly
different meanings especially once you
get into the nitty gritty details of it
through is different than until AMD is
Robert Halleck then went on to really
create the problem that we're running
into today by turning this otherwise
technically accurate point that the
socket would be supported like Intel's
LGA 1151 has been supported for half a
decade into sanctimonious soapboxing
that the and the subreddit has now
resurfaced as a reminder quote the
alternative to this bios problem which
we find truly repugnant is simply
breaking sake compatibility with every
new generation of CPU nobody can keep
their old motherboard and upgrade
anymore nobody would ever have to worry
about bios again but they would also
never get to keep their investments ever
again to us that is not the right thing
to do
it seems hostile and abusive to
arbitrarily prevent users from keeping
the same motherboard which may cost a
few hundred dollars just to make the
upgrade process a little neater on paper
so we do what we can to support in
socket upgrades as we have with socket
am for while technically not a
commitment from AMD that it's going to
support all future Xen CPUs in the same
socket like MSI has made on behalf of
Andy this is still something that
obviously roused the community and it
was written in a way that was supposed
to be sort of a cue for applause if
were held in front of an audience and
these should have stopped that will
support socket am four through 2020
because technically that's correct this
wouldn't be an issue at all today
if Andy didn't knock Intel at the same
time for something that they technically
also have done so it starts to make AMD
it look like a hypocrite because
supporting the same socket for half a
decade it's not impressive to anybody
but the insinuation that you can support
all CPUs released for that socket in all
the chips that's associated with that
socket that's what goddamned Ian's a
problem it was the implication not the
explicit statements by the company so
although everyone sort of assumed to be
450 would carry on support it was
companies like MSI who really provided
the community the ammunition needed to
freak out and bury this issue MSI said
quote if any of the following apply to
you we recommend grabbing a B for fifty
max motherboard C you'd prefer having
the option of using any a m4 processor
that's supported by the B 450 chipset
without worrying about compatibility D
you want access to the full-featured MSI
UEFI BIOS without compromising support
for any a m4 product any a m4 product II
you want a value-oriented motherboard
that will support not only the latest
AMD releases but will also have you
covered for all future and for product
releases regarding point C where they
said CPUs that beat 450 supports
technically as n3 will not at least now
be a CPU that be 450 supports so they're
not fully on there except MSI already
doesn't support CPUs that be 450 does
support in those be 450 motherboards
like Bristol rich for example so as for
whose fault it is it's a bit of both MSI
is making claims that it can't back up
and it did that before AMD really gave a
commitment on what would happen was n3
let's move on to the discussion of the
facts and he has a lot of defenses about
this and we want to talk through why
some of these are a lot more valid than
the communities giving credit to this is
the part where we're moving from
knocking and these marketing and towards
telling the community hey let's tone it
down a little bit and think about what
AMD saying before just going full
freakout mode because there's some
validity here but there's also
some marketing at play and some
defensiveness from AMD's side there is a
hard limit with 16 megabyte roms
especially that's just fact it's the way
it is so no matter how many reddit
sleuths go out there and say that this
is not a real limitation it's not
possible this board BIOS I ripped has
more space in it whatever it is just
fact that it is actually a limit and if
you're one board seems like it could fit
then three CPUs that board doesn't
represent all the board's so as an
example we don't have to look into the
future to know that 16 megabyte limits
for roms are preventing more CPUs from
being stuffed into them we can look at
what's available now and what's
supported now today on boards that are
out today with CPUs that are out today
so as an example most boards don't
support Bristol Ridge that's part of the
m4 platform and part of the ecosystem
but it's not supported several have
mixed support of ApS or no support at
all there are also boards many that
we've worked with in the lab when
testing and these lower-end parts that
don't support the Athlon 3000 G but
technically they are capable of it it's
just it's not in the BIOS not written in
so it wouldn't work some of the rise in
3000 CPUs are already unsupported on X
370 and be 350 boards that's because
largely of the ROM size now depending on
which board you're talking about some of
them do have 32 megabyte roms and those
older boards do have beta bios's that
are available which would enable rise in
3,000 but now you're getting into a
completely different headache it's no
longer related to the size of the ROM
but rather supporting potentially
multiple branches of a GS a-- or of the
bios if you're the motherboard
manufacturer that's a different issue
we'll talk about in a moment so for
those asking if the motherboard makers
could just make special bios which is
not really adjust it's not that easy but
if you're asking if motherboard makers
could reverse engineer a G so once it
comes out for Xen 3 support and add it
to older boards like before 50 boards
the answer is yes technically they could
do it and in some instances like
maasai where they've positioned
themselves to potentially be in a false
advertising lawsuit with some of the
language they've used wasn't very wasn't
quite as careful as I am these language
you might see those vendors try and do
that because they need to protect
themselves but for the most part you
shouldn't really expect reverse
engineering to solve the issues and
there's a few reasons for that first of
all it has to be shipped out the back
door and in an unofficial capacity and
most of these companies which means
likely bugs and unlikely long-term
support most motherboard makers won't
officially support Xen 3 on older boards
for a number of reasons one of which
might be infuriating AMD and the other
one would be because it's not
necessarily easy to reverse engineer a
BIOS people already do this for coffee
lake boards it's out there and those
mods were difficult they were uncommon
and they often have bugs further the
motherboard companies can make more
money by not doing this and it's not
even their fault they can just blame AMD
they have a scapegoat here so it's
unlikely to happen in a widespread
fashion outside of the more sinister
implications that everyone has already
assumed and spun - there are also
several practical ones and we should go
through those point by point one bio
size will vary manufacturer to
manufacturer and those with flashier or
more advanced biases will be more
limited in the amount of CPS they can
support all those graphics take space
and all that complexity and extra menu
items it all takes space to 32 megabyte
roms are uncommon the msi max
motherboards have them and some of the
higher-end boards and other manufacturer
lines do as well but the vast majority
are on 16 megabyte roms three gigabyte
as an example has lighter weight
graphics than amasai and so gigabyte
would be able to fit more CPUs and at 16
mega byte by OS than MSI
but it's still just under the limit this
starts to create an imbalance where now
you're asking motherboard makers to make
a choice between CPU support and flashy
graphics and in an industry where all
the board partners are Petty and bicker
incessantly for special treatment it may
be easier to just cut everyone off let's
stop here and talk more about the ROM
size and then go through the rest first
off we need to establish why 16 megabyte
roms are even
these boards because that might seem
small what we need to do is look back to
the beginning of horizon when it
launched when a m4 was a brand new
platform AMD had almost no motherboard
manufacturers support at all
on the review side there was one board
you could do your review with when Rison
1000 came out and actually trust the
results out of it
that was the AC sport and even that one
we had no fewer than three or four BIOS
updates including one if memory serves
correctly about one day before launch of
the 1800 X so it was not a smooth launch
and the point of bringing this up is you
had maybe about a dozen boards within
months of horizon-1 launching that were
maybe kind of ok but likely had horrible
memory support up and down the stack
everything was it was fubar basically so
the point of all this is to say that
motherboard manufacturers didn't trust
AMD to make a good CPU and they
certainly weren't going to invest in
another potentially dead end platform
AMD spent about a decade launching
garbage the Phenom 2 Series is probably
one of the last good CP is that AMD
launched up until horizon so you really
can't blame the motherboard
manufacturers for not trusting them and
for not supporting the ecosystem this
all leads into the important point of
why 16 megabyte roms and the answer to
why is because you're now talking about
partners who don't trust Andy Andy has
burned bridges with those partners over
the last at least eight years with other
parts and just having no idea what it
was doing imagine then asking a company
like asus which is trying to think of a
clean way to phrase it but money is is
coming out of its rear end at high
velocity from Intel at the time rise in
1080i MSI to switch one part that they
can use on every Intel mother where they
make literally millions of them and then
change that part order to a special part
you're ordering a special tool now for
the job and other special tools they're
not cheap
16 megabyte roms are used everywhere
it's not just in the computer DIY
industry it's used outside of that
industry to billboards use it the menus
at fast-food places you order at have
likely some kind of similar ROM in them
so this is a readily available
off-the-shelf part and asking
motherboard makers to change something
for AMD because trust us it's gonna be
good this time that's not good enough so
asking for 32 megabyte roms at the
beginning would have gotten AMD laughed
out of the room that wouldn't have
worked and we had 16 megabytes on most
of the boards between now and launch of
Zen as a result of that as for the cost
difference it is significant
manufacturers spend nearing three times
the cost in some instances on 32
megabyte roms that's because 16 megabyte
roms are used in everything so again
volume is high and parts are widely
available it's just it's economies of
scale and as always 16 megabyte in
devices outside of PC hardware does mean
ready availability so if you're thinking
as a customer what's another 50 cents
what's another 75 cents what's another
dollar I'm willing to pay that the
answer is that one it's not the cost
amount to you they're gonna multiply it
and maybe you're not willing to pay that
and to this is where the manufacturers
margin comes from video cards have 2.8
percent margin at the low end to 8%
margin sometimes 10 the average is
closer to 4 to 5% motherboards aren't
that different and every dollar you save
is a huge move in the margin when you're
talking a scale of millions of units and
you can watch some of our factory tours
like the tour of MSI or if gigabytes
factory to learn more about exactly how
many units they make to get a sense of
scale for how much $1.00 times that
multiplies so motherboard manufacturers
are already removing one-off CPUs in
their BIOS from support because they
can't fit it and again even the amateur
sleuths or opening hex editors and
saying look there's more room for other
stuff or I could optimize the code cool
but that's not the situation for
literally
everything out there you're not really
proving the whole picture so we come
back to the argument of well they could
just drop support of older products in
favor of newer products and if you do
that you're starting to screw the
customers who want the older product
support and you're telling them hey that
new update that came out don't download
that do not download that it will brick
the system until you get a new CPU and
flash it or maybe it has a flashback
that you can fix it with but either way
not a good customer experience you're
basically segmenting it your Italian
customers who want the older support but
want to continue receiving a GC updates
that they can't update their BIOS and
branching is a different issue we'll
talk about in a second and you're
telling the newer people that they
should flash forward so that's not
really that simple of a solution either
and it becomes RMA hell we're now people
in one thousand two thousand three CPUs
have a whole new complex list of issues
to deal with it's technically possible
to do all this it's not realistic within
the world of manufacturing RMA and
support and customer education so the
only alternative is to maintain multiple
branches of bios and we've seen that
argument too now you're branching
something that is already stretched thin
for support by the teams working on it
the BIOS engineers at some of these
companies we know like all of them
because some of them basically have one
guy so it's not like they have this huge
team that does it all and the testing
teams are also limited so now you're
you're branching code that's already
buggy and often broken in several ways
on these motherboards to begin with even
the good BIOS is and you're gonna end up
with stuff that's broken and one not the
other it gets tested in one not the
other and one of those is going to sort
of fall through the wayside and you're
gonna have a bad customer experience so
remember that you're not just adding one
column to everything it's a matrix
you're adding one column by every row so
that complicates the test matrix it
balloons the BIOS size and that's where
you run into this so all of those why
don't you just make two branches
comments these
your answers and these companies are
barely holding it together as is so
we're not defending them that's the
reality of it until you as a customer
are willing to pay a whole hell of a lot
more it's not gonna get better because
everyone's racing to the bottom no one
has any margin and these are the team
sizes that they have to work with people
would be absolutely pissed at how
dysfunctional the bios's are and it
would be in part maybe at the
motherboard manufacturer but also at AMD
and the board partner certainly would be
pissed at AMD for the perception well
let's assume that everyone can agree on
the ROM size being an issue if the next
factor that many of and these fans
aren't considering especially those in
North America is that it's not as simple
as just dropping support for the least
relevant CPUs like let's say some of the
Rison 1000 cps that were more obscure or
some of the AP use and adding support
for Xen 3 instead that would send
shockwaves through Asia South America
and other regions in the world but
especially in Asia because now you've
got a qualified system that's in a
pipeline that doesn't support
yesterday's CPU which happens to be the
most commonly available CPU in some of
those regions like China Army has become
a major problem in all of the markets
with the Zen Plus launch for example if
you bought stock that had been sitting
around for a while Amazon or in store
and had the Zen one BIOS you'd have
purchased as n+ CPU that day with a
board that won't boot this was resolved
by Andy shipping cheap parts cheap CPUs
T's for flashing and that's the RMA
process that we previously reviewed but
it's still that's not not a cheap
solution for AMD AMD is worried that
people will walk into Best Buy or Micro
Center and be presented with the complex
matrix of motherboards with various
branches of BIOS that won't work at all
so it's trying to move forward with a
more consolidated solution as we said
earlier Intel has reasons beyond just
money for what it does that must be
absolutely hard to believe for some of
the people who've been posting the
comments we've seen in the last week but
it's not just all down to money there is
genuinely some what's the support
experience here how do we deal with the
dude who works in Best Buy
and I mean right now is a bit of a
different scenario given human malware
but how did he deal with that guy who
was hired in off the street and there
was about TVs dryers and Macs
but doesn't really know a whole lot
about pcs educating the support system
it's it's not a trivial task and he
doesn't control the people who work in
the stores on the floor and you're gonna
end up with a complete mess where just
the user experience will be absolutely
terrible and there's value it's a good
user experience where you control some
of it now you can go too far and be
Apple or maybe kind of leaning too far
and be kind of like Intel in some ways
but there is a middle ground between
what AMD was promising and what Intel is
doing and to try and do what to try and
get everything supported on AMD as it is
today would require multiple branches of
bios for some boards it would require
maybe some sort of
RMA system where they send out a cpu for
flashing which is expensive and has
liability I I don't have to pay anything
for it when we did that work and you
just keep the CPU and they say ok well
you can't use support again but it's
like I'll just change the address next
time they'll never know so there's a
liability attached to that and that's by
the way still not a good user experience
because now you're waiting a week for a
CPU to come into flasher board to
install your other CPU and yes obviously
I'm aware of flashback but we're talking
about the wider ecosystem here so there
is a lot involved it's more than just
money
and certainly money's involved too and
AMD's a real big boy company or it's
trying to be one and hopefully its fans
are starting to realize that so they're
going for a mix of experience that
doesn't completely foul the taste of
Andy to new buyers who will if they
can't get the board working swear I am
the off forever and go by Intel again
because they haven't upgraded since
their core 2 duo their core 2 quad
they're in a hail em CPU Sandy Bridge
whatever they're upgrading to Andy for
the first time
nothing works that hurts and the
long-term so that's part of this
decision-making as well but and speaking
with some off record sources AMD knew
that lack of compatibility caused issues
and the wanted to announce the 500
series chipset news about stem 3 support
and the lack of 450 X 470 sm3 support
before the Zen 3 CPU launch because AMD
was trying to preempt that launch and II
didn't want all of this to overshadow a
new CPU launch and so it's given people
time to either sit and simmer or sit and
stew depending on how they feel about
all the news what we also know from
discussions off record with people
familiar with the matter is that AMD
didn't expect the backlash to be this
bad so we'll see if they end up changing
gears at all all we can say so far is
that all that time and II spent knocking
down its competitors over the past years
it could have been building up its own
products and if it did that rather than
going on some self-righteous post about
how Intel is repugnant for not
supporting its CPUs past the single
socket which is really that true anyway
if a hand he had just focused on its own
stuff there wouldn't be this level of
backlash if all AMD said it was will
support socket am 4 through 2020 and it
stopped there there'd be annoyance but
you wouldn't have as much fuel to add to
the fire about why AMD deserves the
level of absolute seething hatred that
it has received from some of its
typically biggest supporters our
thoughts then it's time for AMD as a
company to grow up it has 12,000
employees 65 billion dollar market cap
it's not a mom-and-pop shop when Intel
held press events back in the day when
FX was the only thing AMD had Intel
almost never mentioned FX it was pretty
rare at least the ones we went to and if
you asked Intel about AMD which I would
do at these events Intel's official
response almost unilaterally for years
was quote we don't talk about
competitors or we don't discuss
competitors products they basically
pretended that Andy didn't exist now
that's changed obviously and we don't
really agree with that either
from Intel side but we think that's
really
more proper way to go about this unless
you're maybe doing a head-to-head
comparison but once you're just throwing
well you know at the other company it's
sort of gone off the rails and it's just
playing the cheap seats
so Andy going forward really needs to
just act like Intel doesn't exist at
least with regard to petty fights over
things like socket support and that
would resolve a lot of these issues so
again Intel has reasons for what it does
and Andy is now learning those reasons
we can wrap it up there thanks for
watching subscribe for more as always go
to store documents Nexis dotnet 2 helps
out directly or patreon.com/scishow and
axis if you'd like to support us in
these endeavors because certainly they
don't make a whole lot of friends with
some of the companies in the industry
but we think it'll be good for Andy Andy
has a really good product right now I
look at our reviews we've supported them
with it but it also deserves ire for its
marketing and hopefully it improves with
m3 that's at this one thanks for
watching we'll see you all next time